# Chapter 5: Gorgias - chapter 5, chunk 19

<OVERLAP FROM END OF CHUNK 18>
I was saying, and so I still aver. Socrates And do you mean by the better the same as the superior? for I could not make out what you were saying at the time⁠—whether you meant by the superior the stronger, and that the weaker must obey the stronger, as you seemed to imply when you said that great cities attack small ones in accordance with natural right, because they are superior and stronger, as though the superior and stronger and better were the same; or whether the better may be also the inferior and weaker, and the superior the worse, or whether better is to be defined in the same way as superior:⁠—this is the point which I want to have cleared up. Are the superior and better and stronger the same or different? Callicles I say unequivocally that they are the same. Socrates Then the many are by nature superior to the one, against whom, as you were saying, they make the laws? Callicles Certainly. Socrates Then the laws of the many are the laws of the superior? Callicles Very true. Socrates Then they are the laws of the better; for the superior class are far better, as
</OVERLAP FROM END OF CHUNK 18>

you were saying? Callicles Yes. Socrates And since they are superior, the laws which are made by them are by nature good? Callicles Yes. Socrates And are not the many of opinion, as you were lately saying, that justice is equality, and that to do is more disgraceful than to suffer injustice?⁠—is that so or not? Answer, Callicles, and let no modesty be found to come in the way; 121 do the many think, or do they not think thus?⁠—I must beg of you to answer, in order that if you agree with me I may fortify myself by the assent of so competent an authority. Callicles Yes; the opinion of the many is what you say. Socrates Then not only custom but nature also affirms that to do is more disgraceful than to suffer injustice, and that justice is equality; so that you seem to have been wrong in your former assertion, when accusing me you said that nature and custom are opposed, and that I, knowing this, was dishonestly playing between them, appealing to custom when the argument is about nature, and to nature when the argument is about custom? Callicles This man will never cease talking nonsense. At your age, Socrates, are you not ashamed to be catching at words and chuckling over some verbal slip? do you not see⁠—have I not told you already, that by superior I mean better: do you imagine me to say, that if a rabble of slaves and nondescripts, who are of no use except perhaps for their physical strength, get together, their ipsissima verba are laws? Socrates Ho! my philosopher, is that your line? Callicles Certainly. Socrates I was thinking, Callicles, that something of the kind must have been in your mind, and that is why I repeated the question⁠—What is the superior? I wanted to know clearly what you meant; for you surely do not think that two men are better than one, or that your slaves are better than you because they are stronger? Then please to begin again, and tell me who the better are, if they are not the stronger; and I will ask you, great Sir, to be a little milder in your instructions, or I shall have to run away from you. Callicles You are ironical. Socrates No, by the hero Zethus, Callicles, by whose aid you were just now saying ( 486 A ) many ironical things against me, I am not:⁠—tell me, then, whom you mean, by the better? Callicles I mean the more excellent. Socrates Do you not see that you are yourself using words which have no meaning and that you are explaining nothing?⁠—will you tell me whether you mean by the better and superior the wiser, or if not, whom? Callicles Most assuredly, I do mean the wiser. Socrates Then according to you, one wise man may often be superior to ten thousand fools, and he ought to rule them, and they ought to be his subjects, and he ought to have more than they should. This is what I believe that you mean (and you must not suppose that I am word-catching), if you allow that the one is superior to the ten thousand? Callicles Yes; that is what I mean, and that is what I conceive to be natural justice⁠—that the better and wiser should rule and have more than the inferior. Socrates Stop there, and let me ask you what you would say in this case: Let us suppose that we are all together as we are now; there are several of us, and we have a large common store of meats and drinks, and there are all sorts of persons in our company having various degrees of strength and weakness, and one of us, being a physician, is wiser in the matter of food than all the rest, and he is probably stronger than some and not so strong as others of us⁠—will he not, being wiser, be also better than we are, and our superior in this matter of food? Callicles Certainly. Socrates Either, then, he will have a larger share of the meats and drinks, because he is better, or he will have the distribution of all of them by reason of his authority, but he will not expend or make use of a larger share of them on his own person, or if he does, he will be punished;⁠—his share will exceed that of some, and be less than that of others, and if he be the weakest of all, he being the best of all will have the smallest share of all, Callicles:⁠—am I not right, my friend? Callicles You talk about meats and drinks and physicians and other nonsense; I am not speaking of them. Socrates Well, but do you admit that the wiser is the better? Answer “Yes” or “No.” Callicles Yes. Socrates And ought not the better to have a larger share? Callicles Not of meats and drinks. Socrates I understand: then, perhaps, of coats⁠—the skilfullest weaver ought to have the largest coat, and the greatest number of them, and go about clothed in the best and finest of them? Callicles Fudge about coats! Socrates Then the skilfullest and best in making shoes ought to have the advantage in shoes; the shoemaker, clearly, should walk about in the largest shoes, and have the greatest number of them? Callicles Fudge about shoes! What nonsense are you talking? Socrates Or, if this is not your meaning, perhaps you would say that the wise and good and true husbandman should actually have a larger share of seeds, and have as much seed as possible for his own land? Callicles How you go on, always talking in the same way, Socrates! Socrates Yes, Callicles, and also about the same things. Callicles Yes, by the Gods, you are literally always talking of cobblers and fullers and cooks and doctors, as if this had to do with our argument. Socrates But why will you not tell me in what a man must be superior and wiser in order to claim a larger share; will you neither accept a suggestion, nor offer one? Callicles I have already told you. In the first place, I mean by superiors not cobblers or cooks, but wise politicians who understand the administration of a state, and who are not only wise, but also valiant and able to carry out their designs, and not the men to faint from want of soul. Socrates See now, most excellent Callicles, how different my charge against you is from that which you bring against me, for you reproach me with always saying the same; but I reproach you with never saying the same about the same things, for at one time you were defining the better and the superior to be the stronger, then again as the wiser, and now you bring forward a new notion; the superior and the better are now declared by you to be the more courageous: I wish, my good friend, that you would tell me, once for all, whom you affirm to be the better and superior, and in what they are better? Callicles I have already told you that I mean those who are wise and courageous in the administration of a state⁠—they ought to be the rulers of their states, and justice consists in their having more than their subjects. Socrates But whether rulers or subjects will they or will they not have more than themselves, my friend? Callicles What do you mean? Socrates I mean that every man is his own ruler; but perhaps you think that there is no necessity for him to rule himself; he is only required to rule others? Callicles What do you mean by his “ruling over himself”? Socrates A simple thing enough; just what is commonly said, that a man should be temperate and master of himself, and ruler of his own pleasures and passions. Callicles What innocence! you mean those fools⁠—the temperate? Socrates Certainly:⁠—anyone may know that to be my meaning. Callicles Quite so, Socrates; and they are really fools, for how can a man be happy who is the servant of anything? On the contrary, I plainly assert, that he who would truly live ought to allow his desires to wax to the uttermost, and not to chastise them; but when they have grown to their greatest he should have courage and intelligence to minister to them and to satisfy all his longings. And this I affirm to be natural justice and nobility. To this however the many cannot attain; and they blame the strong man because they are ashamed of their own weakness, which they desire to conceal, and hence they say that intemperance is base. As I have remarked already, they enslave the nobler natures, and being unable to satisfy their pleasures, they praise temperance and justice out of their own cowardice. For if a man had been originally the son of a king, or had a nature capable of acquiring an empire or a tyranny or sovereignty, what could be more truly base or evil than temperance⁠—to a man like him, I say, who might freely be enjoying every good, and has no one to stand in his way, and yet has admitted custom and reason and the opinion of other men to be lords over him?⁠—must not he be in a miserable plight whom the reputation of justice and temperance hinders from giving more to his friends than to his enemies, even though he be a ruler in his city? Nay, Socrates, for you profess to be a votary of the truth, and the truth is this:⁠—that luxury and intemperance and licence, if they be provided with means, are virtue and happiness⁠—all the rest is a mere bauble, agreements contrary to nature, foolish talk of men, nothing worth. 122 Socrates There is a noble freedom, Callicles, in your way of approaching the argument; for what you say is what the rest of the world think, but do not like to say. And I must beg of you to persevere, that the true rule of human life may become manifest. Tell me, then:⁠—you say, do you not, that in the rightly-developed man the passions ought not to be controlled, but that we should let them grow to the utmost and somehow or other satisfy them, and that this is virtue? Callicles Yes; I do. Socrates Then those who want nothing are not truly said to be happy? Callicles No indeed, for then stones and dead men would be the happiest of all. Socrates But surely life according to your view is an awful thing; and indeed I think that Euripides may have been right in saying, “Who knows if life be not death and death life”; and that we are very likely dead; I have heard a philosopher say that at this moment we are actually dead, and that the body ( σῶμα ) is our tomb ( σῆμα 123 ), and that the part of the soul which is the seat of the desires is liable to be tossed about by words and blown up and down; and some ingenious person, probably a Sicilian or an Italian, playing with the word, invented a tale in which he called the soul⁠—because of its believing and make-believe nature⁠—a vessel, 124 and the ignorant he called the uninitiated or leaky, and the place in the souls of the uninitiated in which the desires are seated, being the intemperate and incontinent part, he compared to a vessel full of holes, because it can never be satisfied. He is not of your way of thinking, Callicles, for he declares, that of all the souls in Hades, meaning the invisible world ( ἀειδὲς ), these uninitiated or leaky persons are the most miserable, and that they pour water into a vessel which is full of holes out of a colander which is similarly perforated. The colander, as my informer assures me, is the soul, and the soul which he compares to a colander is the soul of the ignorant, which is likewise full of holes, and therefore incontinent, owing to a bad memory and want of faith. These notions are strange enough, but they show the principle which, if I can, I would fain prove to you; that you should change your mind, and, instead of the intemperate and insatiate life, choose that which is orderly and sufficient and has a due provision for daily needs. Do I make any impression on you, and are you coming over to the opinion that the orderly are happier than the intemperate? Or do I fail to persuade you, and, however many tales I rehearse to you, do you continue of the same opinion still? Callicles The latter, Socrates, is more like the truth. Socrates Well, I will tell you another image, which comes out of the same school:⁠—Let me request you to consider how far you would accept this as an account of the two lives of the temperate and intemperate in a figure:⁠—There are two men, both of whom have a number of casks; the one man has his casks sound and full, one of wine, another of honey, and a third of milk, besides others filled with other liquids, and the streams which fill them are few and scanty, and he can only obtain them with a great deal of toil and difficulty; but when his casks are once filled he has no need to feed them any more, and has no further trouble with them or care about them. The other, in like manner, can procure streams, though not without difficulty; but his vessels are leaky and unsound, and night and day he is compelled to be filling them, and if he pauses for a moment, he is in an agony of pain. Such are their respective lives:⁠—And now would you say that the life of the intemperate is happier than that of the temperate? Do I not convince you that the opposite is the truth? Callicles You do not convince me, Socrates, for the one who has filled himself has no longer any pleasure left; and this, as I was just now saying, is the life of a stone: he has neither joy nor sorrow after he is once filled; but the pleasure depends on the superabundance of the influx. Socrates But the more you pour in, the greater the waste; and the holes must be large for the liquid to escape. Callicles Certainly. Socrates The life which you are now depicting is not that of a dead man, or of a stone, but of a cormorant; you mean that he is to be hungering and eating? Callicles Yes. Socrates And he is to be thirsting and drinking? Callicles Yes, that is what I mean; he is to have all his desires about him, and to be able to live happily in the gratification of them. Socrates Capital, excellent; go on as you have begun, and have no shame; I, too, must disencumber myself of shame: and first, will you tell me whether you include itching and scratching, provided you have enough of them and pass your life in scratching, in your notion of happiness? Callicles What a strange being you are, Socrates! a regular mob-orator.