# Chapter 5: Gorgias - chapter 5, chunk 13

<OVERLAP FROM END OF CHUNK 12>
apply the knife or hot iron to him; and I have persuaded him to do for me what he would not do for the physician just by the use of rhetoric. And I say that if a rhetorician and a physician were to go to any city, and had there to argue in the Ecclesia or any other assembly as to which of them should be elected state-physician, the physician would have no chance; but he who could speak would be chosen if he wished; and in a contest with a man of any other profession the rhetorician more than anyone would have the power of getting himself chosen, for he can speak more persuasively to the multitude than any of them, and on any subject. Such is the nature and power of the art of rhetoric! And yet, Socrates, rhetoric should be used like any other competitive art, not against everybody⁠—the rhetorician ought not to abuse his strength any more than a pugilist or pancratiast or other master of fence;⁠—because he has powers which are more than a match either for friend or enemy, he ought not therefore to strike, stab, or slay his friends. Suppose a man to
</OVERLAP FROM END OF CHUNK 12>

have been trained in the palestra and to be a skilful boxer⁠—he in the fullness of his strength goes and strikes his father or mother or one of his familiars or friends; but that is no reason why the trainers or fencing-masters should be held in detestation or banished from the city;⁠—surely not. For they taught their art for a good purpose, to be used against enemies and evildoers, in self-defence not in aggression, and others have perverted their instructions, and turned to a bad use their own strength and skill. But not on this account are the teachers bad, neither is the art in fault, or bad in itself; I should rather say that those who make a bad use of the art are to blame. And the same argument holds good of rhetoric; for the rhetorician can speak against all men and upon any subject⁠—in short, he can persuade the multitude better than any other man of anything which he pleases, but he should not therefore seek to defraud the physician or any other artist of his reputation merely because he has the power; he ought to use rhetoric fairly, as he would also use his athletic powers. And if after having become a rhetorician he makes a bad use of his strength and skill, his instructor surely ought not on that account to be held in detestation or banished. For he was intended by his teacher to make a good use of his instructions, but he abuses them. And therefore he is the person who ought to be held in detestation, banished, and put to death, and not his instructor. Socrates You, Gorgias, like myself, have had great experience of disputations, and you must have observed, I think, that they do not always terminate in mutual edification, or in the definition by either party of the subjects which they are discussing; but disagreements are apt to arise⁠—somebody says that another has not spoken truly or clearly; and then they get into a passion and begin to quarrel, both parties conceiving that their opponents are arguing from personal feeling only and jealousy of themselves, not from any interest in the question at issue. And sometimes they will go on abusing one another until the company at last are quite vexed at themselves forever listening to such fellows. Why do I say this? Why, because I cannot help feeling that you are now saying what is not quite consistent or accordant with what you were saying at first about rhetoric. And I am afraid to point this out to you, lest you should think that I have some animosity against you, and that I speak, not for the sake of discovering the truth, but from jealousy of you. Now if you are one of my sort, I should like to cross-examine you, but if not I will let you alone. And what is my sort? you will ask. I am one of those who are very willing to be refuted if I say anything which is not true, and very willing to refute anyone else who says what is not true, and quite as ready to be refuted as to refute; for I hold that this is the greater gain of the two, just as the gain is greater of being cured of a very great evil than of curing another. For I imagine that there is no evil which a man can endure so great as an erroneous opinion about the matters of which we are speaking; and if you claim to be one of my sort, let us have the discussion out, but if you would rather have done, no matter;⁠—let us make an end of it. Gorgias I should say, Socrates, that I am quite the man whom you indicate; but, perhaps, we ought to consider the audience, for, before you came, I had already given a long exhibition, and if we proceed the argument may run on to a great length. And therefore I think that we should consider whether we may not be detaining some part of the company when they are wanting to do something else. Chaerephon You hear the audience cheering, Gorgias and Socrates, which shows their desire to listen to you; and for myself, Heaven forbid that I should have any business on hand which would take me away from a discussion so interesting and so ably maintained. Callicles By the gods, Chaerephon, although I have been present at many discussions, I doubt whether I was ever so much delighted before, and therefore if you go on discoursing all day I shall be the better pleased. Socrates I may truly say, Callicles, that I am willing, if Gorgias is. Gorgias After all this, Socrates, I should be disgraced if I refused, especially as I have promised to answer all comers; in accordance with the wishes of the company, then, do you begin, and ask of me any question which you like. Socrates Let me tell you then, Gorgias, what surprises me in your words; though I dare say that you may be right, and I may have misunderstood your meaning. You say that you can make any man, who will learn of you, a rhetorician? Gorgias Yes. Socrates Do you mean that you will teach him to gain the ears of the multitude on any subject, and this not by instruction but by persuasion? Gorgias Quite so. Socrates You were saying, in fact, that the rhetorician will have greater powers of persuasion than the physician even in a matter of health? Gorgias Yes, with the multitude⁠—that is. Socrates You mean to say, with the ignorant; for with those who know he cannot be supposed to have greater powers of persuasion. Gorgias Very true. Socrates But if he is to have more power of persuasion than the physician, he will have greater power than he who knows? Gorgias Certainly. Socrates Although he is not a physician:⁠—is he? Gorgias No. Socrates And he who is not a physician must, obviously, be ignorant of what the physician knows. Gorgias Clearly. Socrates Then, when the rhetorician is more persuasive than the physician, the ignorant is more persuasive with the ignorant than he who has knowledge?⁠—is not that the inference? Gorgias In the case supposed:⁠—yes. Socrates And the same holds of the relation of rhetoric to all the other arts; the rhetorician need not know the truth about things; he has only to discover some way of persuading the ignorant that he has more knowledge than those who know? Gorgias Yes, Socrates, and is not this a great comfort?⁠—not to have learned the other arts, but the art of rhetoric only, and yet to be in no way inferior to the professors of them? Socrates Whether the rhetorician is or not inferior on this account is a question which we will hereafter examine if the enquiry is likely to be of any service to us; but I would rather begin by asking, whether he is or is not as ignorant of the just and unjust, base and honourable, good and evil, as he is of medicine and the other arts; I mean to say, does he really know anything of what is good and evil, base or honourable, just or unjust in them; or has he only a way with the ignorant of persuading them that he not knowing is to be esteemed to know more about these things than someone else who knows? Or must the pupil know these things and come to you knowing them before he can acquire the art of rhetoric? If he is ignorant, you who are the teacher of rhetoric will not teach him⁠—it is not your business; but you will make him seem to the multitude to know them, when he does not know them; and seem to be a good man, when he is not. Or will you be unable to teach him rhetoric at all, unless he knows the truth of these things first? What is to be said about all this? By heavens, Gorgias, I wish that you would reveal to me the power of rhetoric, as you were saying that you would. Gorgias Well, Socrates, I suppose that if the pupil does chance not to know them, he will have to learn of me these things as well. Socrates Say no more, for there you are right; and so he whom you make a rhetorician must either know the nature of the just and unjust already, or he must be taught by you. Gorgias Certainly. Socrates Well, and is not he who has learned carpentering a carpenter? Gorgias Yes. Socrates And he who has learned music a musician? Gorgias Yes. Socrates And he who has learned medicine is a physician, in like manner? He who has learned anything whatever is that which his knowledge makes him. Gorgias Certainly. Socrates And in the same way, he who has learned what is just is just? Gorgias To be sure. Socrates And he who is just may be supposed to do what is just? Gorgias Yes. Socrates And must not 115 the just man always desire to do what is just? Gorgias That is clearly the inference. Socrates Surely, then, the just man will never consent to do injustice? Gorgias Certainly not. Socrates And according to the argument the rhetorician must be a just man? Gorgias Yes. Socrates And will therefore never be willing to do injustice? Gorgias Clearly not. Socrates But do you remember saying just now that the trainer is not to be accused or banished if the pugilist makes a wrong use of his pugilistic art; and in like manner, if the rhetorician makes a bad and unjust use of his rhetoric, that is not to be laid to the charge of his teacher, who is not to be banished, but the wrongdoer himself who made a bad use of his rhetoric⁠—he is to be banished⁠—was not that said? Gorgias Yes, it was. Socrates But now we are affirming that the aforesaid rhetorician will never have done injustice at all? Gorgias True. Socrates And at the very outset, Gorgias, it was said that rhetoric treated of discourse, not (like arithmetic) about odd and even, but about just and unjust? Was not this said? Gorgias Yes. Socrates I was thinking at the time, when I heard you saying so, that rhetoric, which is always discoursing about justice, could not possibly be an unjust thing. But when you added, shortly afterwards, that the rhetorician might make a bad use of rhetoric I noted with surprise the inconsistency into which you had fallen; and I said, that if you thought, as I did, that there was a gain in being refuted, there would be an advantage in going on with the question, but if not, I would leave off. And in the course of our investigations, as you will see yourself, the rhetorician has been acknowledged to be incapable of making an unjust use of rhetoric, or of willingness to do injustice. By the dog, Gorgias, there will be a great deal of discussion, before we get at the truth of all this. Polus And do even you, Socrates, seriously believe what you are now saying about rhetoric? What! because Gorgias was ashamed to deny that the rhetorician knew the just and the honourable and the good, and admitted that to anyone who came to him ignorant of them he could teach them, and then out of this admission there arose a contradiction⁠—the thing which you dearly love, and to which not he, but you, brought the argument by your captious questions⁠—(do you seriously believe that there is any truth in all this?) For will anyone ever acknowledge that he does not know, or cannot teach, the nature of justice? The truth is, that there is great want of manners in bringing the argument to such a pass. Socrates Illustrious Polus, the reason why we provide ourselves with friends and children is, that when we get old and stumble, a younger generation may be at hand to set us on our legs again in our words and in our actions: and now, if I and Gorgias are stumbling, here are you who should raise us up; and I for my part engage to retract any error into which you may think that I have fallen-upon one condition: Polus What condition? Socrates That you contract, Polus, the prolixity of speech in which you indulged at first. Polus What! do you mean that I may not use as many words as I please? Socrates Only to think, my friend, that having come on a visit to Athens, which is the most free-spoken state in Hellas, you when you got there, and you alone, should be deprived of the power of speech⁠—that would be hard indeed. But then consider my case:⁠—shall not I be very hardly used, if, when you are making a long oration, and refusing to answer what you are asked, I am compelled to stay and listen to you, and may not go away? I say rather, if you have a real interest in the argument, or, to repeat my former expression, have any desire to set it on its legs, take back any statement which you please; and in your turn ask and answer, like myself and Gorgias⁠—refute and be refuted: for I suppose that you would claim to know what Gorgias knows⁠—would you not? Polus Yes. Socrates And you, like him, invite anyone to ask you about anything which he pleases, and you will know how to answer him? Polus To be sure. Socrates And now, which will you do, ask or answer? Polus I will ask; and do you answer me, Socrates, the same question which Gorgias, as you suppose, is unable to answer: What is rhetoric? Socrates Do you mean what sort of an art? Polus Yes. Socrates To say the truth, Polus, it is not an art at all, in my opinion. Polus Then what, in your opinion, is rhetoric? Socrates A thing which, as I was lately reading in a book of yours, you say that you have made an art. Polus What thing? Socrates I should say a sort of experience. Polus Does rhetoric seem to you to be an experience? Socrates That is my view, but you may be of another mind. Polus An experience in what? Socrates An experience in producing a sort of delight and gratification. Polus And if able to gratify others, must not rhetoric be a fine thing? Socrates What are you saying, Polus? Why do you ask me whether rhetoric is a fine thing or not, when I have not as yet told you what rhetoric is? Polus Did I not hear you say that rhetoric was a sort of experience? Socrates Will you, who are so desirous to gratify others, afford a slight gratification to me? Polus I will. Socrates Will you ask me, what sort of an art is cookery? Polus What sort of an art is cookery? Socrates Not an art at all, Polus.