# Chapter 5: Gorgias - chapter 5, chunk 17

<OVERLAP FROM END OF CHUNK 16>
and cowardice, and the like? Polus Certainly. Socrates So then, in mind, body, and estate, which are three, you have pointed out three corresponding evils⁠—injustice, disease, poverty? Polus True. Socrates And which of the evils is the most disgraceful?⁠—Is not the most disgraceful of them injustice, and in general the evil of the soul? Polus By far the most. Socrates And if the most disgraceful, then also the worst? Polus What do you mean, Socrates? Socrates I mean to say, that is most disgraceful has been already admitted to be most painful or hurtful, or both. Polus Certainly. Socrates And now injustice and all evil in the soul has been admitted by us to be most disgraceful? Polus It has been admitted. Socrates And most disgraceful either because most painful and causing excessive pain, or most hurtful, or both? Polus Certainly. Socrates And therefore to be unjust and intemperate, and cowardly and ignorant, is more painful than to be poor and sick? Polus Nay, Socrates; the painfulness does not appear to me to follow from your premises. Socrates Then, if, as you would argue, not more painful, the evil of the soul is of all evils the most disgraceful; and
</OVERLAP FROM END OF CHUNK 16>

the excess of disgrace must be caused by some preternatural greatness, or extraordinary hurtfulness of the evil. Polus Clearly. Socrates And that which exceeds most in hurtfulness will be the greatest of evils? Polus Yes. Socrates Then injustice and intemperance, and in general the depravity of the soul, are the greatest of evils? Polus That is evident. Socrates Now, what art is there which delivers us from poverty? Does not the art of making money? Polus Yes. Socrates And what art frees us from disease? Does not the art of medicine? Polus Very true. Socrates And what from vice and injustice? If you are not able to answer at once, ask yourself whither we go with the sick, and to whom we take them. Polus To the physicians, Socrates. Socrates And to whom do we go with the unjust and intemperate? Polus To the judges, you mean. SOCRATES Who are to punish them? Polus Yes. Socrates And do not those who rightly punish others, punish them in accordance with a certain rule of justice? Polus Clearly. Socrates Then the art of moneymaking frees a man from poverty; medicine from disease; and justice from intemperance and injustice? Polus That is evident. Socrates Which, then, is the best of these three? Polus Will you enumerate them? Socrates Moneymaking, medicine, and justice. Polus Justice, Socrates, far excels the two others. Socrates And justice, if the best, gives the greatest pleasure or advantage or both? Polus Yes. Socrates But is the being healed a pleasant thing, and are those who are being healed pleased? Polus I think not. Socrates A useful thing, then? Polus Yes. Socrates Yes, because the patient is delivered from a great evil; and this is the advantage of enduring the pain⁠—that you get well? Polus Certainly. Socrates And would he be the happier man in his bodily condition, who is healed, or who never was out of health? Polus Clearly he who was never out of health. Socrates Yes; for happiness surely does not consist in being delivered from evils, but in never having had them. Polus True. Socrates And suppose the case of two persons who have some evil in their bodies, and that one of them is healed and delivered from evil, and another is not healed, but retains the evil⁠—which of them is the most miserable? Polus Clearly he who is not healed. Socrates And was not punishment said by us to be a deliverance from the greatest of evils, which is vice? Polus True. Socrates And justice punishes us, and makes us more just, and is the medicine of our vice? Polus True. Socrates He, then, has the first place in the scale of happiness who has never had vice in his soul; for this has been shown to be the greatest of evils. Polus Clearly. Socrates And he has the second place, who is delivered from vice? Polus True. Socrates That is to say, he who receives admonition and rebuke and punishment? Polus Yes. Socrates Then he lives worst, who, having been unjust, has no deliverance from injustice? Polus Certainly. Socrates That is, he lives worst who commits the greatest crimes, and who, being the most unjust of men, succeeds in escaping rebuke or correction or punishment; and this, as you say, has been accomplished by Archelaus and other tyrants and rhetoricians and potentates? 117 Polus True. Socrates May not their way of proceeding, my friend, be compared to the conduct of a person who is afflicted with the worst of diseases and yet contrives not to pay the penalty to the physician for his sins against his constitution, and will not be cured, because, like a child, he is afraid of the pain of being burned or cut:⁠—Is not that a parallel case? Polus Yes, truly. Socrates He would seem as if he did not know the nature of health and bodily vigour; and if we are right, Polus, in our previous conclusions, they are in a like case who strive to evade justice, which they see to be painful, but are blind to the advantage which ensues from it, not knowing how far more miserable a companion a diseased soul is than a diseased body; a soul, I say, which is corrupt and unrighteous and unholy. And hence they do all that they can to avoid punishment and to avoid being released from the greatest of evils; they provide themselves with money and friends, and cultivate to the utmost their powers of persuasion. But if we, Polus, are right, do you see what follows, or shall we draw out the consequences in form? Polus If you please. Socrates Is it not a fact that injustice, and the doing of injustice, is the greatest of evils? Polus That is quite clear. Socrates And further, that to suffer punishment is the way to be released from this evil? Polus True. Socrates And not to suffer, is to perpetuate the evil? Polus Yes. Socrates To do wrong, then, is second only in the scale of evils; but to do wrong and not to be punished, is first and greatest of all? Polus That is true. Socrates Well, and was not this the point in dispute, my friend? You deemed Archelaus happy, because he was a very great criminal and unpunished: I, on the other hand, maintained that he or any other who like him has done wrong and has not been punished, is, and ought to be, the most miserable of all men; and that the doer of injustice is more miserable than the sufferer; and he who escapes punishment, more miserable than he who suffers.⁠—Was not that what I said? Polus Yes. Socrates And it has been proved to be true? Polus Certainly. Socrates Well, Polus, but if this is true, where is the great use of rhetoric? If we admit what has been just now said, every man ought in every way to guard himself against doing wrong, for he will thereby suffer great evil? Polus True. Socrates And if he, or anyone about whom he cares, does wrong, he ought of his own accord to go where he will be immediately punished; he will run to the judge, as he would to the physician, in order that the disease of injustice may not be rendered chronic and become the incurable cancer of the soul; must we not allow this consequence, Polus, if our former admissions are to stand:⁠—is any other inference consistent with them? Polus To that, Socrates, there can be but one answer. Socrates Then rhetoric is of no use to us, Polus, in helping a man to excuse his own injustice, that of his parents or friends, or children or country; but may be of use to anyone who holds that instead of excusing he ought to accuse⁠—himself above all, and in the next degree his family or any of his friends who may be doing wrong; he should bring to light the iniquity and not conceal it, that so the wrongdoer may suffer and be made whole; and he should even force himself and others not to shrink, but with closed eyes like brave men to let the physician operate with knife or searing iron, not regarding the pain, in the hope of attaining the good and the honourable; let him who has done things worthy of stripes, allow himself to be scourged, if of bonds, to be bound, if of a fine, to be fined, if of exile, to be exiled, if of death, to die, himself being the first to accuse himself and his own relations, and using rhetoric to this end, that his and their unjust actions may be made manifest, and that they themselves may be delivered from injustice, which is the greatest evil. Then, Polus, rhetoric would indeed be useful. Do you say “Yes” or “No” to that? Polus To me, Socrates, what you are saying appears very strange, though probably in agreement with your premises. Socrates Is not this the conclusion, if the premises are not disproven? Polus Yes; it certainly is. Socrates And from the opposite point of view, if indeed it be our duty to harm another, whether an enemy or not⁠—I except the case of self-defence⁠—then I have to be upon my guard⁠—but if my enemy injures a third person, then in every sort of way, by word as well as deed, I should try to prevent his being punished, or appearing before the judge; and if he appears, I should contrive that he should escape, and not suffer punishment: if he has stolen a sum of money, let him keep what he has stolen and spend it on him and his, regardless of religion and justice; and if he have done things worthy of death, let him not die, but rather be immortal in his wickedness; or, if this is not possible, let him at any rate be allowed to live as long as he can. For such purposes, Polus, rhetoric may be useful, but is of small if of any use to him who is not intending to commit injustice; at least, there was no such use discovered by us in the previous discussion. Callicles Tell me, Chaerephon, is Socrates in earnest, or is he joking? Chaerephon I should say, Callicles, that he is in most profound earnest; but you may well ask him. Callicles By the gods, and I will. Tell me, Socrates, are you in earnest, or only in jest? For if you are in earnest, and what you say is true, is not the whole of human life turned upside down; and are we not doing, as would appear, in everything the opposite of what we ought to be doing? Socrates O Callicles, if there were not some community of feelings among mankind, however varying in different persons⁠—I mean to say, if every man’s feelings were peculiar to himself and were not shared by the rest of his species⁠—I do not see how we could ever communicate our impressions to one another. I make this remark because I perceive that you and I have a common feeling. For we are lovers both, and both of us have two loves apiece:⁠—I am the lover of Alcibiades, the son of Cleinias, and of philosophy; and you of the Athenian Demus, and of Demus the son of Pyrilampes. Now, I observe that you, with all your cleverness, do not venture to contradict your favourite in any word or opinion of his; but as he changes you change, backwards and forwards. When the Athenian Demus denies anything that you are saying in the assembly, you go over to his opinion; and you do the same with Demus, the fair young son of Pyrilampes. For you have not the power to resist the words and ideas of your loves; and if a person were to express surprise at the strangeness of what you say from time to time when under their influence, you would probably reply to him, if you were honest, that you cannot help saying what your loves say unless they are prevented; and that you can only be silent when they are. Now you must understand that my words are an echo too, and therefore you need not wonder at me; but if you want to silence me, silence philosophy, who is my love, for she is always telling me what I am now telling you, my friend; neither is she capricious like my other love, for the son of Cleinias says one thing today and another thing tomorrow, but philosophy is always true. She is the teacher at whose words you are now wondering, and you have heard her yourself. Her you must refute, and either show, as I was saying, that to do injustice and to escape punishment is not the worst of all evils; or, if you leave her word unrefuted, by the dog the god of Egypt, I declare, O Callicles, that Callicles will never be at one with himself, but that his whole life will be a discord. And yet, my friend, I would rather that my lyre should be inharmonious, and that there should be no music in the chorus which I provided; aye, or that the whole world should be at odds with me, and oppose me, rather than that I myself should be at odds with myself, and contradict myself. Callicles O Socrates, you are a regular declaimer, and seem to be running riot in the argument. And now you are declaiming in this way because Polus has fallen into the same error himself of which he accused Gorgias:⁠—for he said that when Gorgias was asked by you, whether, if someone came to him who wanted to learn rhetoric, and did not know justice, he would teach him justice, Gorgias in his modesty replied that he would, because he thought that mankind in general would be displeased if he answered “No”; and then in consequence of this admission, Gorgias was compelled to contradict himself, that being just the sort of thing in which you delight. Whereupon Polus laughed at you deservedly, as I think; but now he has himself fallen into the same trap. I cannot say very much for his wit when he conceded to you that to do is more dishonourable than to suffer injustice, for this was the admission which led to his being entangled by you; and because he was too modest to say what he thought, he had his mouth stopped. For the truth is, Socrates, that you, who pretend to be engaged in the pursuit of truth, are appealing now to the popular and vulgar notions of right, which are not natural, but only conventional. Convention and nature are generally at variance with one another: and hence, if a person is too modest to say what he thinks, he is compelled to contradict himself; and you, in your ingenuity perceiving the advantage to be thereby gained, slyly ask of him who is arguing conventionally a question which is to be determined by the rule of nature; and if he is talking of the rule of nature, you slip away to custom: as, for instance, you did in this very discussion about doing and suffering injustice. When Polus was speaking of the conventionally dishonourable, you assailed him from the point of view of nature; for by the rule of nature, to suffer injustice is the greater disgrace because the greater evil; but conventionally, to do evil is the more disgraceful. For the suffering of injustice is not the part of a man, but of a slave, who indeed had better die than live; since when he is wronged and trampled upon, he is unable to help himself, or any other about whom he cares. The reason, as I conceive, is that the makers of laws are the majority who are weak; and they make laws and distribute praises and censures with a view to themselves and to their own interests; and they terrify the stronger sort of men, and those who are able to get the better of them, in order that they may not get the better of them; and they say, that dishonesty is shameful and unjust; meaning, by the word injustice, the desire of a man to have more than his neighbours; for knowing their own inferiority, I suspect that they are too glad of equality.