# Chapter 5: Gorgias - chapter 5, chunk 14

<OVERLAP FROM END OF CHUNK 13>
state in Hellas, you when you got there, and you alone, should be deprived of the power of speech⁠—that would be hard indeed. But then consider my case:⁠—shall not I be very hardly used, if, when you are making a long oration, and refusing to answer what you are asked, I am compelled to stay and listen to you, and may not go away? I say rather, if you have a real interest in the argument, or, to repeat my former expression, have any desire to set it on its legs, take back any statement which you please; and in your turn ask and answer, like myself and Gorgias⁠—refute and be refuted: for I suppose that you would claim to know what Gorgias knows⁠—would you not? Polus Yes. Socrates And you, like him, invite anyone to ask you about anything which he pleases, and you will know how to answer him? Polus To be sure. Socrates And now, which will you do, ask or answer? Polus I will ask; and do you answer me, Socrates, the same question which Gorgias, as you suppose, is unable to answer: What is rhetoric? Socrates Do you mean what sort of an art? Polus
</OVERLAP FROM END OF CHUNK 13>

Yes. Socrates To say the truth, Polus, it is not an art at all, in my opinion. Polus Then what, in your opinion, is rhetoric? Socrates A thing which, as I was lately reading in a book of yours, you say that you have made an art. Polus What thing? Socrates I should say a sort of experience. Polus Does rhetoric seem to you to be an experience? Socrates That is my view, but you may be of another mind. Polus An experience in what? Socrates An experience in producing a sort of delight and gratification. Polus And if able to gratify others, must not rhetoric be a fine thing? Socrates What are you saying, Polus? Why do you ask me whether rhetoric is a fine thing or not, when I have not as yet told you what rhetoric is? Polus Did I not hear you say that rhetoric was a sort of experience? Socrates Will you, who are so desirous to gratify others, afford a slight gratification to me? Polus I will. Socrates Will you ask me, what sort of an art is cookery? Polus What sort of an art is cookery? Socrates Not an art at all, Polus. Polus What then? Socrates I should say an experience. Polus In what? I wish that you would explain to me. Socrates An experience in producing a sort of delight and gratification, Polus. Polus Then are cookery and rhetoric the same? Socrates No, they are only different parts of the same profession. Polus Of what profession? Socrates I am afraid that the truth may seem discourteous; and I hesitate to answer, lest Gorgias should imagine that I am making fun of his own profession. For whether or not this is that art of rhetoric which Gorgias practises I really cannot tell:⁠—from what he was just now saying, nothing appeared of what he thought of his art, but the rhetoric which I mean is a part of a not very creditable whole. Gorgias A part of what, Socrates? Say what you mean, and never mind me. Socrates In my opinion then, Gorgias, the whole of which rhetoric is a part is not an art at all, but the habit of a bold and ready wit, which knows how to manage mankind: this habit I sum up under the word “flattery”; and it appears to me to have many other parts, one of which is cookery, which may seem to be an art, but, as I maintain, is only an experience or routine and not an art:⁠—another part is rhetoric, and the art of attiring and sophistry are two others: thus there are four branches, and four different things answering to them. And Polus may ask, if he likes, for he has not as yet been informed, what part of flattery is rhetoric: he did not see that I had not yet answered him when he proceeded to ask a further question: Whether I do not think rhetoric a fine thing? But I shall not tell him whether rhetoric is a fine thing or not, until I have first answered, “What is rhetoric?” For that would not be right, Polus; but I shall be happy to answer, if you will ask me, What part of flattery is rhetoric? Polus I will ask and do you answer? What part of flattery is rhetoric? Socrates Will you understand my answer? Rhetoric, according to my view, is the ghost or counterfeit of a part of politics. Polus And noble or ignoble? Socrates Ignoble, I should say, if I am compelled to answer, for I call what is bad ignoble: though I doubt whether you understand what I was saying before. Gorgias Indeed, Socrates, I cannot say that I understand myself. Socrates I do not wonder, Gorgias; for I have not as yet explained myself, and our friend Polus, colt by name and colt by nature, is apt to run away. 116 Gorgias Never mind him, but explain to me what you mean by saying that rhetoric is the counterfeit of a part of politics. Socrates I will try, then, to explain my notion of rhetoric, and if I am mistaken, my friend Polus shall refute me. We may assume the existence of bodies and of souls? Gorgias Of course. Socrates You would further admit that there is a good condition of either of them? Gorgias Yes. Socrates Which condition may not be really good, but good only in appearance? I mean to say, that there are many persons who appear to be in good health, and whom only a physician or trainer will discern at first sight not to be in good health. Gorgias True. Socrates And this applies not only to the body, but also to the soul: in either there may be that which gives the appearance of health and not the reality? Gorgias Yes, certainly. Socrates And now I will endeavour to explain to you more clearly what I mean: The soul and body being two, have two arts corresponding to them: there is the art of politics attending on the soul; and another art attending on the body, of which I know no single name, but which may be described as having two divisions, one of them gymnastic, and the other medicine. And in politics there is a legislative part, which answers to gymnastic, as justice does to medicine; and the two parts run into one another, justice having to do with the same subject as legislation, and medicine with the same subject as gymnastic, but with a difference. Now, seeing that there are these four arts, two attending on the body and two on the soul for their highest good; flattery knowing, or rather guessing their natures, has distributed herself into four shams or simulations of them; she puts on the likeness of some one or other of them, and pretends to be that which she simulates, and having no regard for men’s highest interests, is ever making pleasure the bait of the unwary, and deceiving them into the belief that she is of the highest value to them. Cookery simulates the disguise of medicine, and pretends to know what food is the best for the body; and if the physician and the cook had to enter into a competition in which children were the judges, or men who had no more sense than children, as to which of them best understands the goodness or badness of food, the physician would be starved to death. A flattery I deem this to be and of an ignoble sort, Polus, for to you I am now addressing myself, because it aims at pleasure without any thought of the best. An art I do not call it, but only an experience, because it is unable to explain or to give a reason of the nature of its own applications. And I do not call any irrational thing an art; but if you dispute my words, I am prepared to argue in defence of them. Cookery, then, I maintain to be a flattery which takes the form of medicine; and tiring, in like manner, is a flattery which takes the form of gymnastic, and is knavish, false, ignoble, illiberal, working deceitfully by the help of lines, and colours, and enamels, and garments, and making men affect a spurious beauty to the neglect of the true beauty which is given by gymnastic. I would rather not be tedious, and therefore I will only say, after the manner of the geometricians (for I think that by this time you will be able to follow) as tiring ∶ gymnastic ∶∶ cookery ∶ medicine; or rather, as tiring ∶ gymnastic ∶∶ sophistry ∶ legislation; and as cookery ∶ medicine ∶∶ rhetoric ∶ justice. And this, I say, is the natural difference between the rhetorician and the sophist, but by reason of their near connection, they are apt to be jumbled up together; neither do they know what to make of themselves, nor do other men know what to make of them. For if the body presided over itself, and were not under the guidance of the soul, and the soul did not discern and discriminate between cookery and medicine, but the body was made the judge of them, and the rule of judgment was the bodily delight which was given by them, then the word of Anaxagoras, that word with which you, friend Polus, are so well acquainted, would prevail far and wide: “Chaos” would come again, and cookery, health, and medicine would mingle in an indiscriminate mass. And now I have told you my notion of rhetoric, which is, in relation to the soul, what cookery is to the body. I may have been inconsistent in making a long speech, when I would not allow you to discourse at length. But I think that I may be excused, because you did not understand me, and could make no use of my answer when I spoke shortly, and therefore I had to enter into an explanation. And if I show an equal inability to make use of yours, I hope that you will speak at equal length; but if I am able to understand you, let me have the benefit of your brevity, as is only fair: And now you may do what you please with my answer. Polus What do you mean? do you think that rhetoric is flattery? Socrates Nay, I said a part of flattery; if at your age, Polus, you cannot remember, what will you do by-and-by, when you get older? Polus And are the good rhetoricians meanly regarded in states, under the idea that they are flatterers? Socrates Is that a question or the beginning of a speech? Polus I am asking a question. Socrates Then my answer is, that they are not regarded at all. Polus How not regarded? Have they not very great power in states? Socrates Not if you mean to say that power is a good to the possessor. Polus And that is what I do mean to say. Socrates Then, if so, I think that they have the least power of all the citizens. Polus What! are they not like tyrants? They kill and despoil and exile anyone whom they please. Socrates By the dog, Polus, I cannot make out at each deliverance of yours, whether you are giving an opinion of your own, or asking a question of me. Polus I am asking a question of you. Socrates Yes, my friend, but you ask two questions at once. Polus How two questions? Socrates Why, did you not say just now that the rhetoricians are like tyrants, and that they kill and despoil or exile anyone whom they please? Polus I did. Socrates Well then, I say to you that here are two questions in one, and I will answer both of them. And I tell you, Polus, that rhetoricians and tyrants have the least possible power in states, as I was just now saying; for they do literally nothing which they will, but only what they think best. Polus And is not that a great power? Socrates Polus has already said the reverse. Polus Said the reverse! nay, that is what I assert. Socrates No, by the great⁠—what do you call him?⁠—not you, for you say that power is a good to him who has the power. Polus I do. Socrates And would you maintain that if a fool does what he thinks best, this is a good, and would you call this great power? Polus I should not. Socrates Then you must prove that the rhetorician is not a fool, and that rhetoric is an art and not a flattery⁠—and so you will have refuted me; but if you leave me unrefuted, why, the rhetoricians who do what they think best in states, and the tyrants, will have nothing upon which to congratulate themselves, if as you say, power be indeed a good, admitting at the same time that what is done without sense is an evil. Polus Yes; I admit that. Socrates How then can the rhetoricians or the tyrants have great power in states, unless Polus can refute Socrates, and prove to him that they do as they will? Polus This fellow⁠— Socrates I say that they do not do as they will;⁠—now refute me. Polus Why, have you not already said that they do as they think best? Socrates And I say so still. Polus Then surely they do as they will? Socrates I deny it. Polus But they do what they think best? Socrates Aye. Polus That, Socrates, is monstrous and absurd. Socrates Good words, good Polus, as I may say in your own peculiar style; but if you have any questions to ask of me, either prove that I am in error or give the answer yourself. Polus Very well, I am willing to answer that I may know what you mean. Socrates Do men appear to you to will that which they do, or to will that further end for the sake of which they do a thing? when they take medicine, for example, at the bidding of a physician, do they will the drinking of the medicine which is painful, or the health for the sake of which they drink? Polus Clearly, the health. Socrates And when men go on a voyage or engage in business, they do not will that which they are doing at the time; for who would desire to take the risk of a voyage or the trouble of business?⁠—But they will, to have the wealth for the sake of which they go on a voyage. Polus Certainly. Socrates And is not this universally true? If a man does something for the sake of something else, he wills not that which he does, but that for the sake of which he does it. Polus Yes. Socrates And are not all things either good or evil, or intermediate and indifferent? Polus To be sure, Socrates. Socrates Wisdom and health and wealth and the like you would call goods, and their opposites evils? Polus I should. Socrates And the things which are neither good nor evil, and which partake sometimes of the nature of good and at other times of evil, or of neither, are such as sitting, walking, running, sailing; or, again, wood, stones, and the like:⁠—these are the things which you call neither good nor evil? Polus Exactly so. Socrates Are these indifferent things done for the sake of the good, or the good for the sake of the indifferent? Polus Clearly, the indifferent for the sake of the good. Socrates When we walk we walk for the sake of the good, and under the idea that it is better to walk, and when we stand we stand equally for the sake of the good? Polus Yes. Socrates And when we kill a man we kill him or exile him or despoil him of his goods, because, as we think, it will conduce to our good? Polus Certainly.