# Chapter 5: Gorgias - chapter 5, chunk 11

<OVERLAP FROM END OF CHUNK 10>
the children of Cronos make of their time? They had boundless leisure and the faculty of discoursing, not only with one another, but with the animals. Did they employ these advantages with a view to philosophy, gathering from every nature some addition to their store of knowledge? or, Did they pass their time in eating and drinking and telling stories to one another and to the beasts?⁠—in either case there would be no difficulty in answering. But then, as Plato rather mischievously adds, “Nobody knows what they did,” and therefore the doubt must remain undetermined. To the first there succeeds a second epoch. After another natural convulsion, in which the order of the world and of human life is once more reversed, God withdraws his guiding hand, and man is left to the government of himself. The world begins again, and arts and laws are slowly and painfully invented. A secular age succeeds to a theocratical. In this fanciful tale Plato has dropped, or almost dropped, the garb of mythology. He suggests several curious and important thoughts, such as the possibility of a state of innocence, the existence of a world without traditions, and the difference between human and divine
</OVERLAP FROM END OF CHUNK 10>

government. He has also carried a step further his speculations concerning the abolition of the family and of property, which he supposes to have no place among the children of Cronos any more than in the ideal state. It is characteristic of Plato and of his age to pass from the abstract to the concrete, from poetry to reality. Language is the expression of the seen, and also of the unseen, and moves in a region between them. A great writer knows how to strike both these chords, sometimes remaining within the sphere of the visible, and then again comprehending a wider range and soaring to the abstract and universal. Even in the same sentence he may employ both modes of speech not improperly or inharmoniously. It is useless to criticise the broken metaphors of Plato, if the effect of the whole is to create a picture not such as can be painted on canvas, but which is full of life and meaning to the reader. A poem may be contained in a word or two, which may call up not one but many latent images; or half reveal to us by a sudden flash the thoughts of many hearts. Often the rapid transition from one image to another is pleasing to us: on the other hand, any single figure of speech if too often repeated, or worked out too much at length, becomes prosy and monotonous. In theology and philosophy we necessarily include both “the moral law within and the starry heaven above,” and pass from one to the other (compare for examples Psalms 18:1⁠–⁠25, 19:1⁠–⁠9, etc. ). Whether such a use of language is puerile or noble depends upon the genius of the writer or speaker, and the familiarity of the associations employed. In the myths and parables of Plato the ease and grace of conversation is not forgotten: they are spoken, not written words, stories which are told to a living audience, and so well told that we are more than half-inclined to believe them (compare “Phaedrus” 274 ). As in conversation too, the striking image or figure of speech is not forgotten, but is quickly caught up, and alluded to again and again; as it would still be in our own day in a genial and sympathetic society. The descriptions of Plato have a greater life and reality than is to be found in any modern writing. This is due to their homeliness and simplicity. Plato can do with words just as he pleases; to him they are indeed “more plastic than wax” ( Republic IX 588 D ). We are in the habit of opposing speech and writing, poetry and prose. But he has discovered a use of language in which they are united; which gives a fitting expression to the highest truths; and in which the trifles of courtesy and the familiarities of daily life are not overlooked. Gorgias Persons of the dialogue: Callicles Socrates Chaerephon Gorgias Polus Scene: The house of Callicles Callicles The wise man, as the proverb says, is late for a fray, but not for a feast. Socrates And are we late for a feast? Callicles Yes, and a delightful feast; for Gorgias has just been exhibiting to us many fine things. Socrates It is not my fault, Callicles; our friend Chaerephon is to blame; for he would keep us loitering in the Agora. Chaerephon Never mind, Socrates; the misfortune of which I have been the cause I will also repair; for Gorgias is a friend of mine, and I will make him give the exhibition again either now, or, if you prefer, at some other time. Callicles What is the matter, Chaerephon⁠—does Socrates want to hear Gorgias? Chaerephon Yes, that was our intention in coming. Callicles Come into my house, then; for Gorgias is staying with me, and he shall exhibit to you. Socrates Very good, Callicles; but will he answer our questions? for I want to hear from him what is the nature of his art, and what it is which he professes and teaches; he may, as you (Chaerephon) suggest, defer the exhibition to some other time. Callicles There is nothing like asking him, Socrates; and indeed to answer questions is a part of his exhibition, for he was saying only just now, that anyone in my house might put any question to him, and that he would answer. Socrates How fortunate! will you ask him, Chaerephon⁠—? Chaerephon What shall I ask him? Socrates Ask him who he is. Chaerephon What do you mean? Socrates I mean such a question as would elicit from him, if he had been a maker of shoes, the answer that he is a cobbler. Do you understand? Chaerephon I understand, and will ask him: Tell me, Gorgias, is our friend Callicles right in saying that you undertake to answer any questions which you are asked? Gorgias Quite right, Chaerephon: I was saying as much only just now; and I may add, that many years have elapsed since anyone has asked me a new one. Chaerephon Then you must be very ready, Gorgias. Gorgias Of that, Chaerephon, you can make trial. Polus Yes, indeed, and if you like, Chaerephon, you may make trial of me too, for I think that Gorgias, who has been talking a long time, is tired. Chaerephon And do you, Polus, think that you can answer better than Gorgias? Polus What does that matter if I answer well enough for you? Chaerephon Not at all:⁠—and you shall answer if you like. Polus Ask:⁠— Chaerephon My question is this: If Gorgias had the skill of his brother Herodicus, what ought we to call him? Ought he not to have the name which is given to his brother? Polus Certainly. Chaerephon Then we should be right in calling him a physician? Polus Yes. Chaerephon And if he had the skill of Aristophon the son of Aglaophon, or of his brother Polygnotus, what ought we to call him? Polus Clearly, a painter. Chaerephon But now what shall we call him⁠—what is the art in which he is skilled. Polus O Chaerephon, there are many arts among mankind which are experimental, and have their origin in experience, for experience makes the days of men to proceed according to art, and inexperience according to chance, and different persons in different ways are proficient in different arts, and the best persons in the best arts. And our friend Gorgias is one of the best, and the art in which he is a proficient is the noblest. Socrates Polus has been taught how to make a capital speech, Gorgias; but he is not fulfilling the promise which he made to Chaerephon. Gorgias What do you mean, Socrates? Socrates I mean that he has not exactly answered the question which he was asked. Gorgias Then why not ask him yourself? Socrates But I would much rather ask you, if you are disposed to answer: for I see, from the few words which Polus has uttered, that he has attended more to the art which is called rhetoric than to dialectic. Polus What makes you say so, Socrates? Socrates Because, Polus, when Chaerephon asked you what was the art which Gorgias knows, you praised it as if you were answering someone who found fault with it, but you never said what the art was. Polus Why, did I not say that it was the noblest of arts? Socrates Yes, indeed, but that was no answer to the question: nobody asked what was the quality, but what was the nature, of the art, and by what name we were to describe Gorgias. And I would still beg you briefly and clearly, as you answered Chaerephon when he asked you at first, to say what this art is, and what we ought to call Gorgias: Or rather, Gorgias, let me turn to you, and ask the same question⁠—what are we to call you, and what is the art which you profess? Gorgias Rhetoric, Socrates, is my art. Socrates Then I am to call you a rhetorician? Gorgias Yes, Socrates, and a good one too, if you would call me that which, in Homeric language, “I boast myself to be.” Socrates I should wish to do so. Gorgias Then pray do. Socrates And are we to say that you are able to make other men rhetoricians? Gorgias Yes, that is exactly what I profess to make them, not only at Athens, but in all places. Socrates And will you continue to ask and answer questions, Gorgias, as we are at present doing, and reserve for another occasion the longer mode of speech which Polus was attempting? Will you keep your promise, and answer shortly the questions which are asked of you? Gorgias Some answers, Socrates, are of necessity longer; but I will do my best to make them as short as possible; for a part of my profession is that I can be as short as anyone. Socrates That is what is wanted, Gorgias; exhibit the shorter method now, and the longer one at some other time. Gorgias Well, I will; and you will certainly say, that you never heard a man use fewer words. Socrates Very good then; as you profess to be a rhetorician, and a maker of rhetoricians, let me ask you, with what is rhetoric concerned: I might ask with what is weaving concerned, and you would reply (would you not?), with the making of garments? Gorgias Yes. Socrates And music is concerned with the composition of melodies? Gorgias It is. Socrates By Herè, Gorgias, I admire the surpassing brevity of your answers. Gorgias Yes, Socrates, I do think myself good at that. Socrates I am glad to hear it; answer me in like manner about rhetoric: with what is rhetoric concerned? Gorgias With discourse. Socrates What sort of discourse, Gorgias?⁠—such discourse as would teach the sick under what treatment they might get well? Gorgias No. Socrates Then rhetoric does not treat of all kinds of discourse? Gorgias Certainly not. Socrates And yet rhetoric makes men able to speak? Gorgias Yes. Socrates And to understand that about which they speak? Gorgias Of course. Socrates But does not the art of medicine, which we were just now mentioning, also make men able to understand and speak about the sick? Gorgias Certainly. Socrates Then medicine also treats of discourse? Gorgias Yes. Socrates Of discourse concerning diseases? Gorgias Just so. Socrates And does not gymnastic also treat of discourse concerning the good or evil condition of the body? Gorgias Very true. Socrates And the same, Gorgias, is true of the other arts:⁠—all of them treat of discourse concerning the subjects with which they severally have to do. Gorgias Clearly. Socrates Then why, if you call rhetoric the art which treats of discourse, and all the other arts treat of discourse, do you not call them arts of rhetoric? Gorgias Because, Socrates, the knowledge of the other arts has only to do with some sort of external action, as of the hand; but there is no such action of the hand in rhetoric which works and takes effect only through the medium of discourse. And therefore I am justified in saying that rhetoric treats of discourse. Socrates I am not sure whether I entirely understand you, but I dare say I shall soon know better; please to answer me a question:⁠—you would allow that there are arts? Gorgias Yes. Socrates As to the arts generally, they are for the most part concerned with doing, and require little or no speaking; in painting, and statuary, and many other arts, the work may proceed in silence; and of such arts I suppose you would say that they do not come within the province of rhetoric. Gorgias You perfectly conceive my meaning, Socrates. Socrates But there are other arts which work wholly through the medium of language, and require either no action or very little, as, for example, the arts of arithmetic, of calculation, of geometry, and of playing draughts; in some of these speech is pretty nearly coextensive with action, but in most of them the verbal element is greater⁠—they depend wholly on words for their efficacy and power: and I take your meaning to be that rhetoric is an art of this latter sort? Gorgias Exactly. Socrates And yet I do not believe that you really mean to call any of these arts rhetoric; although the precise expression which you used was, that rhetoric is an art which works and takes effect only through the medium of discourse; and an adversary who wished to be captious might say, “And so, Gorgias, you call arithmetic rhetoric.” But I do not think that you really call arithmetic rhetoric any more than geometry would be so called by you. Gorgias You are quite right, Socrates, in your apprehension of my meaning. Socrates Well, then, let me now have the rest of my answer:⁠—seeing that rhetoric is one of those arts which works mainly by the use of words, and there are other arts which also use words, tell me what is that quality in words with which rhetoric is concerned:⁠—Suppose that a person asks me about some of the arts which I was mentioning just now; he might say, “Socrates, what is arithmetic?” and I should reply to him, as you replied to me, that arithmetic is one of those arts which take effect through words. And then he would proceed to ask: “Words about what?” and I should reply, Words about odd and even numbers, and how many there are of each. And if he asked again: “What is the art of calculation?” I should say, That also is one of the arts which is concerned wholly with words. And if he further said, “Concerned with what?” I should say, like the clerks in the assembly, “as aforesaid” of arithmetic, but with a difference, the difference being that the art of calculation considers not only the quantities of odd and even numbers, but also their numerical relations to themselves and to one another. And suppose, again, I were to say that astronomy is only words⁠—he would ask, “Words about what, Socrates?” and I should answer, that astronomy tells us about the motions of the stars and sun and moon, and their relative swiftness. Gorgias You would be quite right, Socrates. Socrates And now let us have from you, Gorgias, the truth about rhetoric: which you would admit (would you not?) to be one of those arts which act always and fulfil all their ends through the medium of words? Gorgias True. Socrates Words which do what? I should ask. To what class of things do the words which rhetoric uses relate? Gorgias To the greatest, Socrates, and the best of human things. Socrates That again, Gorgias is ambiguous; I am still in the dark: for which are the greatest and best of human things? I dare say that you have heard men singing at feasts the old drinking song, in which the singers enumerate the goods of life, first health, beauty next, thirdly, as the writer of the song says, wealth honestly obtained.