# Chapter 5: Gorgias - chapter 5, chunk 16

<OVERLAP FROM END OF CHUNK 15>
only am left alone and cannot agree, for you do not convince me; although you produce many false witnesses against me, in the hope of depriving me of my inheritance, which is the truth. But I consider that nothing worth speaking of will have been effected by me unless I make you the one witness of my words; nor by you, unless you make me the one witness of yours; no matter about the rest of the world. For there are two ways of refutation, one which is yours and that of the world in general; but mine is of another sort⁠—let us compare them, and see in what they differ. For, indeed, we are at issue about matters which to know is honourable and not to know disgraceful; to know or not to know happiness and misery⁠—that is the chief of them. And what knowledge can be nobler? or what ignorance more disgraceful than this? And therefore I will begin by asking you whether you do not think that a man who is unjust and doing injustice can be happy, seeing that you think Archelaus unjust, and yet happy? May I assume this to be your opinion? Polus Certainly.
</OVERLAP FROM END OF CHUNK 15>

Socrates But I say that this is an impossibility⁠—here is one point about which we are at issue:⁠—very good. And do you mean to say also that if he meets with retribution and punishment he will still be happy? Polus Certainly not; in that case he will be most miserable. Socrates On the other hand, if the unjust be not punished, then, according to you, he will be happy? Polus Yes. Socrates But in my opinion, Polus, the unjust or doer of unjust actions is miserable in any case⁠—more miserable, however, if he be not punished and does not meet with retribution, and less miserable if he be punished and meets with retribution at the hands of gods and men. Polus You are maintaining a strange doctrine, Socrates. Socrates I shall try to make you agree with me, O my friend, for as a friend I regard you. Then these are the points at issue between us⁠—are they not? I was saying that to do is worse than to suffer injustice? Polus Exactly so. Socrates And you said the opposite? Polus Yes. Socrates I said also that the wicked are miserable, and you refuted me? Polus By Zeus, I did. Socrates In your own opinion, Polus. Polus Yes, and I rather suspect that I was in the right. Socrates You further said that the wrongdoer is happy if he be unpunished? Polus Certainly. Socrates And I affirm that he is most miserable, and that those who are punished are less miserable⁠—are you going to refute this proposition also? Polus A proposition which is harder of refutation than the other, Socrates. Socrates Say rather, Polus, impossible; for who can refute the truth? Polus What do you mean? If a man is detected in an unjust attempt to make himself a tyrant, and when detected is racked, mutilated, has his eyes burned out, and after having had all sorts of great injuries inflicted on him, and having seen his wife and children suffer the like, is at last impaled or tarred and burned alive, will he be happier than if he escape and become a tyrant, and continue all through life doing what he likes and holding the reins of government, the envy and admiration both of citizens and strangers? Is that the paradox which, as you say, cannot be refuted? Socrates There again, noble Polus, you are raising hobgoblins instead of refuting me; just now you were calling witnesses against me. But please to refresh my memory a little; did you say⁠—“in an unjust attempt to make himself a tyrant”? Polus Yes, I did. Socrates Then I say that neither of them will be happier than the other⁠—neither he who unjustly acquires a tyranny, nor he who suffers in the attempt, for of two miserables one cannot be the happier, but that he who escapes and becomes a tyrant is the more miserable of the two. Do you laugh, Polus? Well, this is a new kind of refutation⁠—when anyone says anything, instead of refuting him to laugh at him. Polus But do you not think, Socrates, that you have been sufficiently refuted, when you say that which no human being will allow? Ask the company. Socrates O Polus, I am not a public man, and only last year, when my tribe were serving as Prytanes, and it became my duty as their president to take the votes, there was a laugh at me, because I was unable to take them. And as I failed then, you must not ask me to count the suffrages of the company now; but if, as I was saying, you have no better argument than numbers, let me have a turn, and do you make trial of the sort of proof which, as I think, is required; for I shall produce one witness only of the truth of my words, and he is the person with whom I am arguing; his suffrage I know how to take; but with the many I have nothing to do, and do not even address myself to them. May I ask then whether you will answer in turn and have your words put to the proof? For I certainly think that I and you and every man do really believe, that to do is a greater evil than to suffer injustice: and not to be punished than to be punished. Polus And I should say neither I, nor any man: would you yourself, for example, suffer rather than do injustice? Socrates Yes, and you, too; I or any man would. Polus Quite the reverse; neither you, nor I, nor any man. Socrates But will you answer? Polus To be sure, I will; for I am curious to hear what you can have to say. Socrates Tell me, then, and you will know, and let us suppose that I am beginning at the beginning: which of the two, Polus, in your opinion, is the worst?⁠—to do injustice or to suffer? Polus I should say that suffering was worst. Socrates And which is the greater disgrace?⁠—Answer. Polus To do. Socrates And the greater disgrace is the greater evil? Polus Certainly not. Socrates I understand you to say, if I am not mistaken, that the honourable is not the same as the good, or the disgraceful as the evil? Polus Certainly not. Socrates Let me ask a question of you: When you speak of beautiful things, such as bodies, colours, figures, sounds, institutions, do you not call them beautiful in reference to some standard: bodies, for example, are beautiful in proportion as they are useful, or as the sight of them gives pleasure to the spectators; can you give any other account of personal beauty? Polus I cannot. Socrates And you would say of figures or colours generally that they were beautiful, either by reason of the pleasure which they give, or of their use, or of both? Polus Yes, I should. Socrates And you would call sounds and music beautiful for the same reason? Polus I should. Socrates Laws and institutions also have no beauty in them except in so far as they are useful or pleasant or both? Polus I think not. Socrates And may not the same be said of the beauty of knowledge? Polus To be sure, Socrates; and I very much approve of your measuring beauty by the standard of pleasure and utility. Socrates And deformity or disgrace may be equally measured by the opposite standard of pain and evil? Polus Certainly. Socrates Then when of two beautiful things one exceeds in beauty, the measure of the excess is to be taken in one or both of these; that is to say, in pleasure or utility or both? Polus Very true. Socrates And of two deformed things, that which exceeds in deformity or disgrace, exceeds either in pain or evil⁠—must it not be so? Polus Yes. Socrates But then again, what was the observation which you just now made, about doing and suffering wrong? Did you not say, that suffering wrong was more evil, and doing wrong more disgraceful? Polus I did. Socrates Then, if doing wrong is more disgraceful than suffering, the more disgraceful must be more painful and must exceed in pain or in evil or both: does not that also follow? Polus Of course. Socrates First, then, let us consider whether the doing of injustice exceeds the suffering in the consequent pain: Do the injurers suffer more than the injured? Polus No, Socrates; certainly not. Socrates Then they do not exceed in pain? Polus No. Socrates But if not in pain, then not in both? Polus Certainly not. Socrates Then they can only exceed in the other? Polus Yes. Socrates That is to say, in evil? Polus True. Socrates Then doing injustice will have an excess of evil, and will therefore be a greater evil than suffering injustice? Polus Clearly. Socrates But have not you and the world already agreed that to do injustice is more disgraceful than to suffer? Polus Yes. Socrates And that is now discovered to be more evil? Polus True. Socrates And would you prefer a greater evil or a greater dishonour to a less one? Answer, Polus, and fear not; for you will come to no harm if you nobly resign yourself into the healing hand of the argument as to a physician without shrinking, and either say “Yes” or “No” to me. Polus I should say “No.” Socrates Would any other man prefer a greater to a less evil? Polus No, not according to this way of putting the case, Socrates. Socrates Then I said truly, Polus, that neither you, nor I, nor any man, would rather do than suffer injustice; for to do injustice is the greater evil of the two. Polus That is the conclusion. Socrates You see, Polus, when you compare the two kinds of refutations, how unlike they are. All men, with the exception of myself, are of your way of thinking; but your single assent and witness are enough for me⁠—I have no need of any other, I take your suffrage, and am regardless of the rest. Enough of this, and now let us proceed to the next question; which is, Whether the greatest of evils to a guilty man is to suffer punishment, as you supposed, or whether to escape punishment is not a greater evil, as I supposed. Consider:⁠—You would say that to suffer punishment is another name for being justly corrected when you do wrong? Polus I should. Socrates And would you not allow that all just things are honourable in so far as they are just? Please to reflect, and tell me your opinion. Polus Yes, Socrates, I think that they are. Socrates Consider again:⁠—Where there is an agent, must there not also be a patient? Polus I should say so. Socrates And will not the patient suffer that which the agent does, and will not the suffering have the quality of the action? I mean, for example, that if a man strikes, there must be something which is stricken? Polus Yes. Socrates And if the striker strikes violently or quickly, that which is struck will be struck violently or quickly? Polus True. Socrates And the suffering to him who is stricken is of the same nature as the act of him who strikes? Polus Yes. Socrates And if a man burns, there is something which is burned? Polus Certainly. Socrates And if he burns in excess or so as to cause pain, the thing burned will be burned in the same way? Polus Truly. Socrates And if he cuts, the same argument holds⁠—there will be something cut? Polus Yes. Socrates And if the cutting be great or deep or such as will cause pain, the cut will be of the same nature? Polus That is evident. Socrates Then you would agree generally to the universal proposition which I was just now asserting: that the affection of the patient answers to the affection of the agent? Polus I agree. Socrates Then, as this is admitted, let me ask whether being punished is suffering or acting? Polus Suffering, Socrates; there can be no doubt of that. Socrates And suffering implies an agent? Polus Certainly, Socrates; and he is the punisher. Socrates And he who punishes rightly, punishes justly? Polus Yes. Socrates And therefore he acts justly? Polus Justly. Socrates Then he who is punished and suffers retribution, suffers justly? Polus That is evident. Socrates And that which is just has been admitted to be honourable? Polus Certainly. Socrates Then the punisher does what is honourable, and the punished suffers what is honourable? Polus True. Socrates And if what is honourable, then what is good, for the honourable is either pleasant or useful? Polus Certainly. Socrates Then he who is punished suffers what is good? Polus That is true. Socrates Then he is benefited? Polus Yes. Socrates Do I understand you to mean what I mean by the term “benefited”? I mean, that if he be justly punished his soul is improved. Polus Surely. Socrates Then he who is punished is delivered from the evil of his soul? Polus Yes. Socrates And is he not then delivered from the greatest evil? Look at the matter in this way:⁠—In respect of a man’s estate, do you see any greater evil than poverty? Polus There is no greater evil. Socrates Again, in a man’s bodily frame, you would say that the evil is weakness and disease and deformity? Polus I should. Socrates And do you not imagine that the soul likewise has some evil of her own? Polus Of course. Socrates And this you would call injustice and ignorance and cowardice, and the like? Polus Certainly. Socrates So then, in mind, body, and estate, which are three, you have pointed out three corresponding evils⁠—injustice, disease, poverty? Polus True. Socrates And which of the evils is the most disgraceful?⁠—Is not the most disgraceful of them injustice, and in general the evil of the soul? Polus By far the most. Socrates And if the most disgraceful, then also the worst? Polus What do you mean, Socrates? Socrates I mean to say, that is most disgraceful has been already admitted to be most painful or hurtful, or both. Polus Certainly. Socrates And now injustice and all evil in the soul has been admitted by us to be most disgraceful? Polus It has been admitted. Socrates And most disgraceful either because most painful and causing excessive pain, or most hurtful, or both? Polus Certainly. Socrates And therefore to be unjust and intemperate, and cowardly and ignorant, is more painful than to be poor and sick? Polus Nay, Socrates; the painfulness does not appear to me to follow from your premises. Socrates Then, if, as you would argue, not more painful, the evil of the soul is of all evils the most disgraceful; and the excess of disgrace must be caused by some preternatural greatness, or extraordinary hurtfulness of the evil. Polus Clearly. Socrates And that which exceeds most in hurtfulness will be the greatest of evils? Polus Yes. Socrates Then injustice and intemperance, and in general the depravity of the soul, are the greatest of evils? Polus That is evident. Socrates Now, what art is there which delivers us from poverty? Does not the art of making money? Polus Yes. Socrates And what art frees us from disease? Does not the art of medicine? Polus Very true. Socrates And what from vice and injustice? If you are not able to answer at once, ask yourself whither we go with the sick, and to whom we take them. Polus To the physicians, Socrates. Socrates And to whom do we go with the unjust and intemperate? Polus To the judges, you mean. SOCRATES Who are to punish them? Polus Yes. Socrates And do not those who rightly punish others, punish them in accordance with a certain rule of justice? Polus Clearly. Socrates Then the art of moneymaking frees a man from poverty; medicine from disease; and justice from intemperance and injustice? Polus That is evident.